PIPELINES.md, before:


# Luigi Pipeline for Decollaging and Uploading FlowCam Images

## Overview

This Luigi pipeline is designed to process large `.tif` images generated by a FlowCam device. The pipeline breaks down these large images into smaller "vignette" images, adds metadata (e.g., latitude, longitude, date, and depth) to the resulting images, and then uploads the processed images to a specified destination (e.g., an S3 bucket or an external API).

The pipeline is structured as a series of Luigi tasks, each handling a specific step in the workflow:
1. **Reading Metadata**: Parses `.lst` files to extract metadata.
2. **Decollaging**: Extracts individual images from large `.tif` files.
3. **Uploading**: Uploads processed images to a specified endpoint.

## Pipeline Architecture

The pipeline consists of the following Luigi tasks:

### 1. `ReadMetadata`
   - **Purpose**: Reads the `.lst` file to extract metadata for image slicing.
   - **Input**: `.lst` file generated by the FlowCam device.
   - **Output**: A `.csv` file (`metadata.csv`) containing parsed metadata.

### 2. `DecollageImages`
   - **Purpose**: Uses metadata to slice a large `.tif` image into smaller vignette images.
   - **Input**: The `metadata.csv` file generated by `ReadMetadata`.
   - **Output**: Individual vignette images with EXIF metadata, saved in the specified output directory.

### 3. `UploadDecollagedImagesToS3`
   - **Purpose**: Uploads processed vignette images to a specified S3 bucket or an external API.
   - **Input**: Processed vignette images generated by `DecollageImages`.
   - **Output**: A confirmation file (`s3_upload_complete.txt`) indicating successful uploads.

### 4. `FlowCamPipeline` (Wrapper Task)
   - **Purpose**: A wrapper task that runs all the above tasks in sequence.
   - **Dependencies**: It manages the dependencies and order of execution of the entire pipeline.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.7 or above
- The following Python packages:
  - `luigi`
  - `pandas`
  - `numpy`
  - `scikit-image`
  - `requests`
  - `pytest` (for testing)
  - `boto3` (for S3 interactions)
  - `aioboto3` (for async S3 interactions)
  - `fastapi` and `uvicorn` (for the external API)

## Setup and Installation

1. **Clone the Repository**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your_username/plankton_pipeline_luigi.git
   cd flowcam-pipeline
   ```

2. **Setup JASMIN credentials**  

   If using S3 for uploading, make sure your AWS credentials are set in a .env file in the root directory:

   ```bash
   AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=your_access_key
   AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=your_secret_key
   AWS_URL_ENDPOINT=your_endpoint_url
   ```

## Running the pipeline

1. **Start the Luigi Central Scheduler**

Path to `--logdir` is optional, if you don't have permissions to write to `/var/log`

   ```bash
   luigid --background --logdir=./logs
   ```

2. **Run the Pipeline Script**

   ```bash
   python -m luigi --module pipeline.pipeline_decollage FlowCamPipeline \
    --directory /path/to/flowcam/data \
    --output-directory /path/to/output \
    --experiment-name test_experiment \
    --s3-bucket your-s3-bucket-name
    ```

Commit message:

Documentation-only, focus on use of the object store (#42)
* link the documentation together, remove older parts

* note on running the API first in the pipeline docs

PIPELINES.md, after:


# Luigi Pipeline for Decollaging and Uploading FlowCam Images

## Overview

This Luigi pipeline is designed to process large `.tif` images generated by a FlowCam device. The pipeline breaks down these large images into smaller "vignette" images, adds metadata (e.g., latitude, longitude, date, and depth) to the resulting images, and then uploads the processed images to a specified destination (e.g., an S3 bucket or an external API).

The pipeline is structured as a series of Luigi tasks, each handling a specific step in the workflow:
1. **Reading Metadata**: Parses `.lst` files to extract metadata.
2. **Decollaging**: Extracts individual images from large `.tif` files.
3. **Uploading**: Uploads processed images to a specified endpoint.

## Pipeline Architecture

The pipeline consists of the following Luigi tasks:

### 1. `ReadMetadata`
   - **Purpose**: Reads the `.lst` file to extract metadata for image slicing.
   - **Input**: `.lst` file generated by the FlowCam device.
   - **Output**: A `.csv` file (`metadata.csv`) containing parsed metadata.

### 2. `DecollageImages`
   - **Purpose**: Uses metadata to slice a large `.tif` image into smaller vignette images.
   - **Input**: The `metadata.csv` file generated by `ReadMetadata`.
   - **Output**: Individual vignette images with EXIF metadata, saved in the specified output directory.

### 3. `UploadDecollagedImagesToS3`
   - **Purpose**: Uploads processed vignette images to a specified S3 bucket or an external API.
   - **Input**: Processed vignette images generated by `DecollageImages`.
   - **Output**: A confirmation file (`s3_upload_complete.txt`) indicating successful uploads.

### 4. `FlowCamPipeline` (Wrapper Task)
   - **Purpose**: A wrapper task that runs all the above tasks in sequence.
   - **Dependencies**: It manages the dependencies and order of execution of the entire pipeline.


## Setup and Installation

1. **Installation and dependencies**

Follow the [main README][README.md] to create a python environment and install our dependencies into it


2. **Setup JASMIN credentials**  

   If using S3 for uploading, make sure your AWS credentials are set in a .env file in the root directory:

   ```bash
   AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=your_access_key
   AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=your_secret_key
   AWS_URL_ENDPOINT=your_endpoint_url
   ```

## Running the pipeline

0. **Start the object store API**

The pipeline uses the separate [object_store_api](https://github.com/NERC-CEH/object_store_api/) to manage data in s3. 

Please see the README in that project for different modes of running it. Shortest version is:

* `git clone https://github.com/NERC-CEH/object_store_api.git`
* `pip install -e .[all]`
* Add `.env` file with your credentials to object storage as above 
* `fastapi run --workers 4 src/os_api/api.py`

1. **Start the Luigi Central Scheduler**

Path to `--logdir` is optional, if you don't have permissions to write to `/var/log`

   ```bash
   luigid --background --logdir=./logs
   ```

2. **Run the Pipeline Script**

   ```bash
   python -m luigi --module pipeline.pipeline_decollage FlowCamPipeline \
    --directory /path/to/flowcam/data \
    --output-directory /path/to/output \
    --experiment-name test_experiment \
    --s3-bucket your-s3-bucket-name
    ```
